# Terminology Bindings

This chapter defines the model meaning binding and value set binding between data elements in the Logical Model and their corresponding SNOMED CT concepts and value sets. These bindings ensure precise alignment between the Logical Model and SNOMED CT, supporting consistent and interoperable representation of laboratory orders, specimens, and results.

### Laboratory Order <a href="#id-5.2terminologybindings-laboratoryorder" id="id-5.2terminologybindings-laboratoryorder"></a>

The laboratory orders represent the request that starts the laboratory process. In the context of this implementation guide for the LOINC Ontology, the recommendation is to use Observable entities for this purpose, selected from a subset that is marked as "Orderable" entities by LOINC.

<table><thead><tr><th width="106.44921875">Attribute</th><th width="147.65234375">Type</th><th>Value Set Binding</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>code</td><td>Structured</td><td><code>&#x3C; 363787002 |Observable entity (observable entity)| {{ C moduleId = 11010000107 }} AND ^ |Orderable LOINC Concepts|</code></td></tr><tr><td>priority</td><td>Structured</td><td><code>&#x3C; 272125009 |Priorities (qualifier value)|</code></td></tr><tr><td>status</td><td>Structured</td><td><code>&#x3C; 288532009 |Context values for actions (qualifier value)|</code></td></tr></tbody></table>

### Specimen <a href="#id-5.2terminologybindings-specimen" id="id-5.2terminologybindings-specimen"></a>

SNOMED CT includes a hierarchy of specimens and is used to define observable entities in the LOINC Ontology. The specimens used in the LOINC Ontology can be extracted using the SNOMED CT Expression Constraint Language by selecting concepts used as values for the 704327008 |Direct site (attribute)| within the LOINC Ontology.

<table><thead><tr><th width="125.1484375">Attribute</th><th width="124.3671875">Type</th><th>Value Set Binding</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>code</td><td>Structured</td><td>(&#x3C; 363787002 |Observable entity (observable entity)| {{ C moduleId = 11010000107 }} . (704327008 |Direct site (attribute)| OR 704319004 |Inheres in (attribute)|) ) AND ( &#x3C;&#x3C; 123038009 |Specimen (specimen)|)</td></tr><tr><td>collection method</td><td>Structured</td><td>&#x3C;&#x3C;(&#x3C;&#x3C;17636008 |Specimen collection (procedure)|.260686004 |Method (attribute)|)</td></tr></tbody></table>

### Result <a href="#id-5.2terminologybindings-result" id="id-5.2terminologybindings-result"></a>

In the results, the codes for tests can be different from those ordered. In cases like "panels", the order concepts are transformed into a set of observable concepts that can be reported as results. The LOINC Ontology identifies a subset of observable concepts that are valid to report as "observed" results.

<table><thead><tr><th width="127.1171875">Attribute</th><th width="202.48046875">Type/Note</th><th>Value Set Binding</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>Test code</td><td>Structured</td><td>&#x3C; 363787002 |Observable entity (observable entity)| {{ C moduleId = 11010000107 }} AND ^ |Observable LOINC Concepts|</td></tr><tr><td>Value</td><td>Unstructured</td><td>N/A</td></tr><tr><td>Structured</td><td>Variable: depends on each observable.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Reference Range</td><td>Unstructured</td><td>N/A</td></tr><tr><td>Units</td><td>Structured</td><td>&#x3C;&#x3C; 767525000 |Unit (qualifier value)|</td></tr><tr><td>Interpretation</td><td>Structured</td><td>Variable: depends on each observable.</td></tr><tr><td>Status</td><td>Structured</td><td>&#x3C; 288532009 |Context values for actions (qualifier value)|</td></tr></tbody></table>






<a href="https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScTmbZIf0UEQwYDkY27EEWBkaiYkHSbR0_9DmFrMLXoQLyL7Q/viewform?usp=pp_url&entry.1767247133=LOINC+Implementation+Guide&entry.670899847=Terminology%20Bindings" class="button primary">Provide Feedback</a>
